We've been talking about the various buildings
and one thing I wanted to ask you in particular to
have it on record is I've been told a couple of times
who the girl was that was used for a model for the
heads on the systems building. This was Sarah,
Sarah Orth. Sarah Orth was the daughter of Bill
Orth. who came to the college about 1928 or 1929
principally to head the buildings and grounds
department at the time, when at the time the
college had decided they would erect the library
themselves and the first wing on the chemistry
building. She was his daughter, grew up here a
number of years on the campus, a very attractive
young lady.
Sam Vosper used her as a model for some of the
figures decorating the system administration
building entrance and main lobby. So the
procedure for making these, whether they were
faces or animal heads, was to was to carve one and
then make a mold from that and then cast? You had to
make a plaster mold and some something to set up
your molds for making your castings from. And then
thereafter, you cast however many you needed. And
that all was done on campus, too. That's right.
You mentioned that the college decided to build
some of these new buildings on its own. In other
words, it was its own contractor, and it hired the
laborers to do all the work. under whose direction
then? Well, as I said, this W.A. Orth, a graduate of
A&M, I don't remember where he was working when he
came here, but
he was brought here to head the department and the
buildings and college utilities department
actually constructed these buildings, along
with another project like extension of utility
tunnels and things of that sort. But I think of
those two buildings particularly that were built
in that time. I'm not certain about Hart Hall. I
can't remember when that was contracted. I'd
rather think the college built it, too. I should
know. I designed the heating system for it at the
time. That was one of the other things I wanted to
ask you. How much of the designing did you
personally do on some of the buildings? Well,
principally my work, quite often there was an
intermingling of my work with the engineering
experiment station, the college architect,
because the offices were in the same building, the
head man was the same. Generally, I designed some
of the mechanical equipment, in particular hot
water heating systems. I remember particularly
Hart Hall, the dormitory, and Walton Hall, and the
Cushing Library, the original heating system and
that. And then of course later when we cut over or
changed over the heating of the entire campus,
which was a combination of steam heating and hot
water heating, and established a central hot
water heating system and converted all buildings
that had been steamed to hot water heating. Well,
that was one of my jobs of making the designs for the
changeover and the buildings. That would have
been after you came back from the war though? No,
that was in the 30s. So you did have a excuse me,
central heating system before the war. Yes, but it
didn't include all buildings. A number of the
buildings had a hot water heating system, but they
had a heat exchanger in the building which
converted steam to hot water or heated the water
with steam that was then circulated by gravity
through the building. At that time, we went to
forced circulation from a central plant. Did you
make use of any students in any of these building
projects? There were always students used for
drafting and other purposes all the time. Now, of
course, primarily in the Big 33 expansion, this
was Depression days, and architects and
engineers were quite readily obtainable at that
time because there wasn't much construction
going on, and we had a full staff of largely adult
engineers and architects, although they always
had a number of students that did various things,
particularly drafting, that is putting the thing
on the tracing cloth that had been designed by
someone else. I was particularly asking or
interested in whether you used students in in any
of the actual construction, any of the laborers
for digging foundations? Particularly in
summer, quite often they were used in that. It was
difficult to use students in many construction
jobs because most of the time they didn't have
hours that fitted in very well with construction
time. I used quite a number in the buildings and
college utilities. A very large portion of the
janitorial service or custodial service in those
days was students. This is pre-World War II. Yeah.
Were any of the buildings constructed as WPA
projects?
I don't believe we had any buildings conducted,
but we had other construction projects on the
campus, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. At the time
I left, I had a crew out at what was to be Easterwood
Airport, a construction crew clearing off the
pasture area there so that it could be graded and
built.
We made a lot of drainage pipe, concrete pipe,
actually set up a plant and made it with WPA labor.
We made a lot of half rounds to use in lining some of
the drainage ditches, particularly what is now
the golf course. A number of those creeks were
partially lined with half round pipes and small
concrete slabs.
Was that to prevent additional erosion? Well, it
had to clear up so the stuff would drain out and you
wouldn't get holes that raised mosquitoes in and
things, and that's how you improved the drainage.
Now, I believe a little bit earlier you indicated
that in, what, late 1940 you entered the military
service. Yes. In what capacity did you enter the
service? At that time I was
in the infantry. Olin Teague and I went on duty
together on October the 2nd, 1940 at Fort Sam for
physical exams. He wound up with the military
police company down at Camp Palacios. And I was an
infantry instructor in the Houston Military
District, stationed in Houston initially.
At that time, I was a first lieutenant.
I take it you had remained in military. I was
commissioned a second lieutenant in 1929 on May
26, And then you remained in what was then the
National Guard? No, I retained my reserve
commission. In fact, the first summer I went on
active duty after graduation, I was in the 359th
Infantry, which was headquartered in Dallas. And
I had been assigned to them because my home address
was Denison, Texas, up north of Dallas. At the same
time, I got to camp another regiment was there, the
360th, which was composed of Houston and College
Station, the southern part of the state area. And
Colonel Ike Ashburn was the colonel commanding
the unit. And Colonel Ashburn at that time was
secretary of the Former Students Association,
and then later became assistant to the president.
And he was then succeeded by E. McQuillan.
I
stayed there in Houston until, I don't know long,
about May 1941,
just to show you how you might, how assignments
might happen. Back in 34 and 5, I had commanded a
camp of two Civilian Conservation Corps
companies in Santa Fe, New Mexico. And I had a
lieutenant under my command there named Harold
Penny from Arizona. And I was adjutant in the
Houston Military District and infantry
instructor there. One day I was reading the Army
and Navy Journal and happened to see a story on the
front page about the adjutant general school
being set up in Washington, D.C. And on the staff
and factory, they listed this Jack Penny. I had not
heard of him since then so I dropped him a note
telling him what I was doing and I was adjutant
there and this and that. About a week later I had a
call from San Antonio Military District that was
in charge of all the reserve activities in the 8th
service, 8th corps area it was then.
They told me they had a request for my being
transferred to the adjutant general school And
Colonel Jones at the time said, well, Badger, you
don't have to go if you don't want to. We won't
release you. I said, well, that sounds kind of
interesting to me. I think I'll try it. So I was
immediately transferred to the Adjutant General
School, the staff and faculty there. I was
assistant editor of the Adjutant General's
publications at that time. Of course, we had gone
on active duty Both Tig and I for six months for
training, but we hadn't been on more than a month or
so until they extended to a year, and you were
supposed to rotate after a year. So after 13
months, I might as well return to College Station.
I'd been on military leave. This was before war,
before Pearl Harbor, but it was just about time to
meet myself going back. Although when I returned
to college, Mr. Gilchrist, who was then dean of
engineering, and Mr. Spence, who was then acting
vice director of the engineering experiment
station, assigned me to Austin to represent the
university on the governor's originally
industrial staff, which about that time became
defense staff, by the time I got there.
And then, so how long did you stay in Austin then?
Well, immediately after Pearl Harbor, I had
orders to return to active duty to the infantry
school in Fort Benning, Georgia. And I was working
with the Secretary of State quite a bit in Austin.
Bill,
I don't know the name of that graduate, by the way.
Anyhow, I told Bill to tell the governor that I was
going back to an active duty. I was a captain at the
time. And next week would be my last over there. The
following week, I came back to close up my office.
And the Secretary of State told me, he said,
Howard, I hope you don't mind it, but Governor
Stevenson and I called General Donovan. I told
them we just couldn't let you go right now, and he's
deferred you for six months. I told them, well, I
wouldn't have done it, but since they've done it,
I'll naturally stay. So I stayed there until June
the 1st of 1942,
that would be, which time I went on duty to tank the
Story Camp Command as Assistant G-1 on General
A.D. Bruce's staff at that time. Where were you
stationed at? At Camp Hood. Camp Hood, uh-huh.
General Bruce always had a dream then of making
Camp Hood a permanent post. So when it was set up,
you had a number of buildings on the
camp painted post headquarters, post this and
post that. Well, of course, the only one that's
legal was post engineer. The rest of them are
temporary insulation as a camp and not entitled to
be called a post. And it stayed that way until an
inspector general from Washington came through
and happened to see them. And they were
immediately repainted with the designation camp
instead of post headquarters. I was the first
adjutant. of Camp Hood and when it was established
and moved out from Temple there when we first
opened it. How long did you stay at Camp Hood or Fort
Hood as it's known?
Let's see, I got there really finally I think about
July the first of 42
and
I I don't remember now whether it was a year or two. I
stayed there until I went to the commanding
general staff school at Fort Leavenworth.
And right now I can't remember whether it was the
spring of 42
or 43. After completion of the course there, I was
assigned to the 8th Service Command
headquarters, which is in Dallas then. first
Director of the Enlisted Section of the Military
Personnel Division and later as Director of the
Military Personnel Division 8th Service
Command.
Did you stay there then until the end of the war or
did you have another service somewhere else? No, I
wound up at two other installations. During the
time I was at the Service Command Headquarters,
The technical services installations were
transferred from the chief of the service, like
the chief surgeon or the chief engineer, to the
service commander. Two of those posts were Camp
Claiborne down in Louisiana between Lake Charles
and Alexandria. It was an engineering camp,
training center. and the medical training center
out at Barclay.
These commanding officers couldn't remember
that they were no longer on the chiefs of services
and were under the service command, commanding
general instead, and this led to quite a number of
problems, and both of them had gotten a pretty bad
reputation in the military services anyhow. So
the general set up an investigating board to go to
Camp Claiborne and find out what was wrong with it.
And it was my job with some assistance to dig into
the personnel set up at Camp Claiborne. And I
admit, while we were there, every time we got
anything from the service command headquarters,
we were scared to death we were going to be
transferred there. But we got out safely and
returned to Dallas. And a few weeks later, we were
sent out to Camp Barkley at Abilene to do the same
thing there. And some months later after return, I
was sent out to Camp Barkley to be director of
personnel for the camp and begin to close out the
installation. This was in the
long about the time of the Battle of the Bulge. And
then from there I went to
camp up at Gainesville, Camp Howes. As director of
personnel, I wasn't there very long. The
commanding officer and I went to service command
headquarters a time or so, and each time he came
back and said, Badgett, you better thank me. I
can't be out of Claiborne this time. And one day, he
came in after a review. He was very fond of having
reviews on Saturday morning, which I was not great
at hearing of. He came in and called me in the
office, stuck out his hand, said, well, goodbye,
Batch. And I said, Carl, who's going, you or me? He
says, you're going to Captain Claiborne. So I went
down there to try to straighten out the personnel
situation and that mess. But I enjoyed both
assignments very much.
At what point then did you leave active duty?
I left Claiborne,
I believe I went off active duty in February 1946.
Did you return immediately to the A&M then? Yes. In
fact, knowing I was going to get out soon, I had come
over here one weekend to see Mr. Spence, with whom
I'd worked with before in the Experiment Station,
and he had been assigned a job as head in the
Construction Program Office for the college at
the time, and of course I was on military leave at
the time. I didn't know whether I'd have a job when I
got back or not, but But to see him he said, Howard
says, I've just got so much to do that I'm making
enemies out of my friends. I'm getting so nasty
with them. I need some help and I'd pay you a lot more
money to work here and I can't never an experiment
station. So at that time when I returned I went into
physical plant work at the university or college
at that time. Did you go in immediately as
assistant manager of? Assistant manager of
construction. Assistant manager of
construction.
What, then, were your responsibilities in that
position? Well, at that time, I guess our most
pressing job at that time was converting Hart and
Walton Halls for family occupancy, making suites
of rooms out of them for married veterans who were
returning to A&M, as well as completing the
construction on what a conversion of the project
houses. I started to say construction, but they
were built during the Depression. And they were
converted to married student housing for
graduate students at the time. Oh, I took over a lot
of these jobs, and the planning, and the handling,
and various construction projects on the campus.
And then along in that time, we
Buildings and Grounds, or Buildings and
Utilities it was called at that time, was under Mr.
Spence's nominal direction too. I took
over the administration of the
operating end of the
buildings and utilities and set up the physical
plant department.
landscape or building of the grounds department
which had been acting or operating under the head
of the floor culture and landscape department and
reorganized the thing. Of course that time Knox
Walker was my superintendent of buildings and
utilities. I was unaware of the fact that Hart and
Walton had ever been converted to married student
housing. Well, they left themselves very well to
it because it's a suite type of dormitory. You have
two rooms with a connecting bath, laboratory,
laboratory in each room. What we did, we took one
room was the sleeping quarters and the other room
was the kitchen 9-ed. We bought some kitchen
cabinets and installed them in there. and stoves.
We piped it with gas. So each married couple had two
rooms in which one you could say was the living room
bedroom and the other was the dining room kitchen.
For how long were these two buildings used that
way? Two or three years. Of course we You had a
decline in students during the war, and then this
surge of returning veterans, of which many, many
of them were married. A&M had no married student
housing of any sort at that time. So those were very
readily bought beds. I believe we used the regular
dormitory beds. Bought a dresser, dinette table,
chairs, and a few other odds and ends, and put in
kitchen stoves, refrigerators, and the kitchen
cabinet was seen. At what point were the barrack
type college view buildings either brought in or
constructed? Well, I had charge of that.
These were,
I guess in 47 it was started, not terribly long
after the war, and we procured these what had been
barracks
down at Victoria, Texas at Foster Field, and of
course the government handled the contracting of
it, actual construction, and our own engineering
superintendent on the job. We had to provide the
utilities, walks and streets for it, and the basic
plan for it. And these were dismantled in sections
and brought up here in pieces and reassembled and
converted from barracks to four or eight
apartments each, two on each floor. Now they've
been very serviceable. The students have
generally been very happy with what they had for
the money they had. In fact, there were some
protests when this group was torn down for those
first new permanent, not Hensel. Hensel, it was
built back of the idea that ultimately the front
part, the old barracks apartments would be this
amount of torn down and new apartment houses built
there. And so were the brick ones. And so were the
first brick ones. And then we did demolish several
on this end. I've forgotten how many, four or five
of them. And built some permanent apartment
there. That's the ones that have just been
completed? No, these were built several years
ago. They were air conditioned. And then these
were built.
I didn't tear down any for those. I just got rid of
the rest of it. I see they're built on down on what
had been the, what Prince Hensel had started as an
arboretum. And they're part of the landscape
architecture. That's the ones right on College
Avenue. Well, I won't say it unless you turn that
off. They may be very nice inside now, and I'm sure
they are. Did your responsibilities as assistant
manager for construction of physical plants
carry any responsibilities
for the annex?
Well, before they required the annex,
actually I believe Mr. Spence and I divided
responsibilities. He would handle the new
construction, I'd handle the renovation and the
maintenance and operation of the physical plant.
And
jointly we, I say we acquired, we did the footwork
of acquiring the annex. I remember I had in
inventory every piece of what they call personal
property out there when we took it over and when we
turned it back the first time. See, we had it twice.
First time they took it over,
and then
they closed the base down completely. Well, we had
it probably in about 47. We got it in about 47, I
think. We took it over and we had set up freshmen,
moved freshman class out there. And they lived in
one school out there. The basic, what was called
the basic division. Basic division. It was what,
about four years out there, wasn't it? Three or
four. I don't remember how long it was. And then I
guess what, during the Korean War, the Air Force
took it back over? That would be when it took it back
over and it operated again. And then we acquired
it. Then after that, on a permanent basis, after
they had removed certain buildings and we decided
we didn't want, And we bought it, got it, went on it.
We would get 5% equity in it each year we occupied
it. In other words, in 20 years it would be 100%
ours. Unless we, but some parts we actually
bought. They set a price so we could get them on
something they wouldn't have set up, they didn't
want to change. And then later we got rid of most all
the other buildings in the room. Rather, well, the
teal theater of operation type construction, the
living quarters and a lot of these wooden
buildings were kept under the more apartment
type, the later hangars and such.
So, but you had some responsibility for
converting any of those buildings after? We set up
a branch of the physical plant operation office
out there and had a superintendent who worked
under the superintendent
of the physical plant.
And the ability to tell us I was a director, but then
I became director of the physical plant separated
completely from his dispensing room over there.
Okay. After
having been assistant manager, you became the
manager of fiscal plans, at least according to the
former student's directorate. Yes, I was the
manager of fiscal plans, and then it was later
changed to director of fiscal plans.
Was it at that point that you separated from Mr.
Spencer's operation?